# TDO_LCCMR
Data analysis modeling temperature and dissolved oxygen in MN lakes to understand cold-water habitat (cisco) resilience

# Project Description 
Coldwater fish habitat in Minnesota lakes is threatened by climate change and nutrient pollution. Bottom waters of lakes can support coldwater fish even when surface temperatures are too warm, but only if deep waters maintain sufficient oxygen. Extreme rain events can flush nutrients into lakes and deplete oxygen, threatening fish habitat and causing fish kills. Protecting forested watersheds can reduce nutrient loads and maintain coldwater fish habitat even as lakes warm and extreme rain events increase in frequency. State agencies and non-profit organizations in Minnesota are actively engaged in watershed management as a means to protect coldwater fish habitat. However, current conservation targets are not lake specific, do not account for the impacts of extreme rain events, and cannot identify the effectiveness of specific types of watershed management practices in terms of their impact on coldwater fish habitat. Indeed, some lakes have experienced fish kills following extreme rain events in spite of high levels of watershed protection, pointing to an urgent need to update existing targets to account for extreme rain events, to develop more specific guidance that accounts for variability among lakes, and to specify on-the-ground management practices that increase the resilience of coldwater fish habitat to climate warming and extreme rain events. We will quantify the effectiveness of watershed management practices in maintaining coldwater fish habitat in lakes as the climate warms and extreme rain events become more common. By partnering with government agencies and conservation groups, this work ensures that conservation planning tools are updated with this best-available science. We will (1)Estimate lake-specific watershed protection targets for conserving coldwater fish habitat in all lakes in Minnesota that currently contain coldwater species (specifically, cisco and lake trout). These targets will be based on statistical models that account for the impacts of warming temperatures, extreme precipitation events, and detailed watershed characteristics. (2) Conduct a detailed assessment of coldwater fish habitat, coldwater fish populations, and watershed characteristics and land use practices on lakes that are either surprisingly resilient or surprisingly sensitive to quantify how extreme storm events influence coldwater fish habitat and populations and to identify specific practices that increase resilience. (3) Collaborate with state and non-profit groups currently engaged in watershed protection to tailor our approach and integrate results into existing planning tools to directly support effective conservation and efficient use of public resources. Results from this project will allow management agencies and conservation groups to effectively conserve coldwater fish habitat into the future. 

# UMN Research Team 
Dr. Gretchen Hansen (PI)
Micheal McGuigan
Naomi Blinick 
Denver Link
Dr. Cam Mosley

# Funding
Minnesota Environmental and Natural Resources Trust Fund
